docs: Implement style guide rules - active voice, misc #2 (#23273)
MystenLabs/sui: docs/content/concepts/sui-architecture/transaction-lifecycle.mdx

A transaction passes certification if:  

- It has a valid user signature.  
- The initiator owns the required input objects.  
- Any shared input objects exist.  
- The gas coin is a `Coin<SUI>` with at least the specified gas budget.  

If the transaction passes, the validator signs it with its BLS private key and returns the signature. The full node collects signatures from a supermajority of validators to form a **transaction certificate**.  

Because of quorum intersection, it is impossible to create two valid certificates for the same owned object version, even if some validators act dishonestly.

:::info
Full nodes collect validator signatures in parallel to minimize latency.  
:::

## Execution

Validators execute transactions after certification.  

- If the transaction does not use shared objects, validators execute it immediately.  
- If the transaction includes shared objects, validators submit it to consensus, which orders and then executes it.  

## Certified effects

After execution, validators sign the effects of the transaction and return them. Effects include:  

> - Objects that were mutated, created, wrapped, unwrapped, or deleted.  
> - Gas spent.  
> - Execution status (success or error).  

Author: ```suggestion
- Objects that were mutated, created, wrapped, unwrapped, or deleted
- Gas spent
- Execution status (success or error)
```

The full node collects signatures from a supermajority and forms an **effects certificate**.  

:::tip
An effects certificate guarantees finality.  
:::

You can present an effects certificate to another party (for example, proving you transferred an NFT) as irrefutable proof.

## Checkpoints

Checkpoints are the final stage. Validators group ordered transactions from consensus into checkpoints.  

- For transactions with shared objects, consensus comes first.  
- For transactions with only owned objects, execution comes first, then consensus.  

Checkpoints ensure causal completeness: dependencies appear before dependents. Each checkpoint contains transaction digests and effects digests. Formation usually takes a few seconds.  

> At this stage, the transaction is part of the permanent history of the Sui network.

Author: ```suggestion
At this point, the transaction has reached the end of its life cycle and is included in the permanent record of transaction activity on the Sui network.
```

## Example: paying for coffee

Imagine you pay 10 SUI to a coffee shop.  

1. **Transaction creation:** Your wallet constructs and signs a transfer of 10 SUI to the shop’s address.  
2. **Broadcast:** Your wallet submits the signed transaction to a full node, which broadcasts it to validators.  
3. **Certification:** Validators check validity, lock input objects, and sign the transaction. The full node collects signatures and forms a transaction certificate.  
4. **Finalization:** The certificate is sent to validators. They verify, execute, and return signed effects. The full node collects them into an effects certificate, which your wallet can show to the shop as proof of payment.  

### Checkpoint processing

If the wallet or full node fails before collecting enough signatures, the transaction can still finalize once included in a checkpoint. As long as one validator receives the certificate, checkpoints ensure finality.

### Local execution on full node

Full nodes may execute transactions locally before returning effects to keep state fresh, especially for high-frequency use cases. This behavior depends on the `WaitForLocalExecution` parameter.  

> For simple payments, `WaitForEffects` is usually preferred because it reduces latency.

Author: ```suggestion
When an app constructs a transaction, it typically requests that the full node choose a gas object for it. Gas objects are owned objects, meaning that if the full node is stale and not aware of the right version of the object, it could lead to invalid transactions, or worse, client equivocation if the client software does not handle it properly. Executing on full node before returning `EffectsCertificate` is one way to avoid this situation. A request can ask for such behavior by using the `WaitForLocalExecution` parameter. See [Sponsored Transactions](../transactions/sponsored-transactions.mdx) for more on client equivocation.

Using `WaitForLocalExecution` is not always the best choice, however. For example, with this coffee payment it adds a layer of end-to-end latency without significant benefits. In this case, using the `WaitForEffects` parameter instead to have a slightly shorter user-perceived latency.```

### Epoch change

Every ~24 hours, the network reconfigures during an epoch change. Rewards are distributed, validator metadata updates, and protocol upgrades may occur.  

If a transaction is caught at the epoch boundary, its certificate might become void (since signatures include the epoch ID). In this case, the wallet resubmits the transaction in the new epoch. Full nodes handle this automatically.

### Verifying finality

If your wallet crashes, it can query the full node with `getTransactionBlock` after restarting:  

> - If transaction details are returned, it is finalized.  
> - If `None`, the transaction may be dropped or not yet checkpointed. The safe option is to resubmit.  

Author: ```suggestion
The wallet app can query the full node with the `getTransactionBlock` method. Assuming the full node is honest:
- If the response contains transaction details, the transaction must have been finalized. It is either executed with `WaitForLocalExecution`, or executed as a checkpointed transaction.
- If the response is `None`, it could mean the transaction was dropped in some step, or is already finalized but this full node does not know yet. In this scenario, the safer option is to resubmit the transaction.
```

> Once included in a checkpoint, the effects appear locally on all full nodes.

Author: ```suggestion
Before a transaction is locally executed, its effects are not reflected on the full node. The same idea applies to the coffee shop's full node. Your transaction was not submitted through this full node, hence it does not have a chance to locally execute it before it's included in a checkpoint. This full node must wait for the transaction to be checkpointed and state synced, which normally takes a few seconds. After the full node receives this transaction in a checkpoint, it is executed and has effects updated locally, for example the coffee shop's balance increases.
```

## Summary

> - A **transaction certificate** suggests finality but may become void after an epoch change.  
> - An **effects certificate** guarantees finality, backed by a supermajority of validators.  
> - Inclusion in a **certified checkpoint** also guarantees finality, as it represents validator consensus on executed transactions.  

Author: ```suggestion
Hopefully, you now have a better understanding of how a transaction gets certified and finalized.

1. A transaction certificate does not always guaranteed finality, even though it's highly likely. Specifically, a transaction certificate might become void after an epoch change.

2. An effects certificate guarantees finality - it takes a supermajority of validators to execute the transaction and commit to the effects.

3. An inclusion in a certified checkpoint guarantees finality - it takes a supermajority of validators to certify the checkpoint, in which every transaction is executed and effects-committed.
```
